[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
Gaiam "Inspirations."
Welcome to our beautiful
Los Angeles studio.
According to the Census
Bureau, 78 million households
in the United States
currently have children
under the age of 18
years old living at home.
So even if you have
nieces or nephews,
or if you'd like to take a look
back at your own childhood,
would you like to know what
it would be like to parent
without power struggles?
And that is what we're
talking about today
with licensed marriage
and family therapist
and credentialed teacher
Susan Stiffelman with over 25
years of experience teaching
and lecturing and parenting
about the lessons from
her book "Parenting
Without Power Struggles."
Welcome.
>>SUSAN STIFFELMAN:
Thanks, Lisa.
It's great to be here.
>>LISA: Yes.
It's great to have you here.
I was just discussing with
you if it was easy to do this,
we wouldn't need books
and tapes and information
on how to parent
without power struggles.
Because we were mostly
parented that way, right?
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
We were mostly parented
with "because I said so,"
kids taking their misbehavior
or their naughty behavior
underground or being sneaky,
because the parents were so
in their face and so assertive
or aggressive about controlling
what they did.
>>LISA: Most people would
call that discipline.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
discipline's great.
And I'm all about
parents owning the role.
I call it being the
captain of the ship.
So I definitely
believe that parents
need to be the one in charge.
But it's different
from being in control.
Power struggles happen when
you're jockeying for position
or you're trying to maintain
some semblance of control,
which our parents
were largely about.
>>LISA: And also,
I mean, children
are trying to
become independent.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: So how do you give
them permission to do that?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: So I just want to say,
first of all, that this is not
something that everybody will
get right 100% of the time,
because of what
you just explained.
>>STIFFELMAN: Exactly.
>>LISA: And I, as a parent,
love the principles,
adhere to most of them.
But I need to also
not beat myself up
if I fall off the wagon or do
something that was, you know,
from my childhood.
So what do you
think is the biggest
mistake that parents make?
One of them.
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh, gosh.
I think one of the
biggest mistakes
that parents make is
being afraid to parent,
being fearful of their
kids, not owning the role
that their children
most need them
to inhabit, which is-- I call
it the captain of the ship.
So I'll explain
that in a minute.
But if I were to say what's the
biggest mistake, first of all,
you said something
earlier about being right.
And I throw that away.
Because there is no right.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: And even when
we think about a mistake,
I would say that the
biggest challenge might
be that we don't
understand how essential it
is for our children and
the happiness of our home
to actually inhabit that
role of being in charge,
even if it comes at
the cost of our kids
not liking us or being
upset or not being happy
or those things that
we try to avoid,
because they just
don't feel good.
>>LISA: So your perspective
is to be the captain,
to be in charge--
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --to not be the friend,
best friend of your child.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yep, yep.
I tell parents, make sure
you have other friends.
Because they're going
to be a lot of days
when your children
don't consider you
one of the theirs,
best or another one.
>>LISA: Right.
Now, what about when you have
only children, when you're
your child's mother and
sometimes sister and friend?
>>STIFFELMAN: You know,
from having spoken with you,
you have a really
sweet relationship
with your daughter.
And I have a great
relationship with my son
who's about to
graduate from college.
He's 22.
And he's an only child.
It's trickier sometimes when
it's just that one child.
There aren't siblings around
to sort of share the spotlight.
But of course it can be done.
It means still that
there are going
to be times when your daughter
just doesn't like you.
And you have to allow for that
in favor of being buddy-buddy
and--
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN:
--making sure that she
feels that you're
really her chum.
She needs to have her
friends, age appropriate.
And you need to have yours.
>>LISA: It's a balance.
Most of the mothers that I speak
to who have multiple children,
their biggest complaint is the
fighting between the children.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: And so we're going
to address that in a second.
But let's start off
with the main principal.
>>STIFFELMAN: OK.
Sure.
OK.
So there's a few basic
elements of my work
that seem to make sense
and one in particular
that's very visual.
So I'll show it to you.
So this right hand is going
to represent the parent.
And my left hand
represents the child.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: So the
right hand on top.
I have my bracelet on
the child hand today.
>>LISA: OK, OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: So this is the
captain of the ship position.
The child might say, I really
want to go to the mall at 9:00
tonight to see this really
cool movie with my friends.
And she's 11, let's say.
And you don't think
that's a good idea.
So you, as captain, would
see the big picture,
the storm that you
might sail into here.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
sweetheart, I'm
afraid that's not going
to work out for tonight.
Why not?
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>STIFFELMAN: Now,
here's where it's
going to get-- nobody in
charge in this position.
Because it's not safe.
Yes, it is.
Sweetie, it's not.
9 o'clock, the mall is--
>>LISA: So you're negotiating.
You're arguing.
>>STIFFELMAN: The
daughter's going to say,
you treat me like a baby.
Nobody's in charge here.
And I call this the two lawyers.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
this is what you said.
There's negotiating.
There's jockeying for position.
There's pushing
and pushing back.
And then it can get worse.
I had a coaching call today
with someone on the east coast.
And this is where she was
down below with her daughter
announcing something
she was going
to do with or
without permission.
In the case of the mall, then
your daughter says, I hate you.
And I'm not even
eating my dinner
or doing my homework,
your 11-year-old.
You're down here.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>STIFFELMAN: The way you
know you're down here--
and I call this the dictator--
>>LISA: Oh.
>>STIFFELMAN: --is that you're
bribing and threatening.
So you're trying to
force your daughter
to do what you want
so you can feel
you're back in
control, back on top.
And inside, you feel
desperate and out of control.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>STIFFELMAN: And so
here's where you're pushing
and you're trying to
assert some authority.
But it's not going
to work, because--
>>LISA: That's where,
I'll give you $1.
You're not taking
whatever lesson this week.
OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Been there.
>>STIFFELMAN: It
comes from down here.
Yes.
>>LISA: I know that really well.
>>STIFFELMAN: We all do.
Listen, I wrote the book, and
I still have my challenges.
>>LISA: Good to know.
>>STIFFELMAN: Or did.
>>LISA: You literally
wrote the book.
>>STIFFELMAN: I mean,
he's now in college.
Right.
So the idea is that when you
captain the ship, energetically
you own the role.
You're calm.
You're confident.
In the same way that if
you were a passenger ship
and the alarm went off
on the ship, you know,
woop, woop, woop, you
don't want your captain
leaping over the side of the
ship like the guy did in Italy.
>>LISA: RIght.
>>STIFFELMAN: You
want the captain who
recognizes that you're in a
problem, you've hit an iceberg,
and handles it.
So when the child's
upset, ideally-
and we're all aiming for
this-- you hold this place.
And there's lots of ways
that I teach that we do that.
So that no matter what she
puts at you or what storm she's
in the middle of, you
help her through it.
>>LISA: Well, I'm just
going to assert to say this.
We are not in charge that
much in our own lives
even without being parents.
I mean, really?
I mean, look, how
many times are you
in charge of your life in full
empowerment throughout your day
with conversations with people
in line, or at the bank,
or with your family members.
>>STIFFELMAN:
Right, right, right.
>>LISA: I mean, usually
we lose that power.
So that's why I
said earlier this is
a conversation across the board.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: How do you assert
that type of power?
>>STIFFELMAN: Well,
there's a lot about it.
The first is that, you know,
put your hands up for a minute.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: I want
to show you something.
So if we were standing up and
I started to push against you,
what would you do?
>>LISA: Push back.
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
And you can sort of see
that we're doing that.
Human instinct is
to push against that
which pushes against us.
We're wired to resist coercion.
>>LISA: Ah, resistance.
>>STIFFELMAN: Right?
So when you come at a
child, not because you're
captaining your ship,
but because you're either
down here in lawyer
mode or down here
feeling desperate in dictator
mode, you will come at her.
And her instinct will be
to resist or to push back.
Now, the interesting
thing is that instinct
to resist being bossed around
is actually a good thing.
>>LISA: Right.
I was going to say, so isn't
this freedom, independence--
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: --hero's
journey, whatever it is.
>>STIFFELMAN: Well, it's that.
But it's also a
survival mechanism.
Meaning, that I
believe we're meant
to raise our
children in a tribe.
So if we're in a tribe and
your three-year-old wanders
off to the perimeter,
you want her
to say no if a stranger
says come with me
and to run back to who?
>>LISA: You.
>>STIFFELMAN: To you, the person
to whom he or she is attached.
>>LISA: Safest, yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: So the way
we override this instinct
to push and push back or
resist is through attachment.
So at some point today, I'd
love to go over these stages
that the child moves
through in the first six
years of their life,
becoming more and more deeply
attached to you.
It's one element
that helps position
you to captain the ship.
Because it instinctively
helps your child
want to take direction from
you rather than resist it.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Is this what is called
attachment parenting
or different?
>>STIFFELMAN: It's an element.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: It's a
little bit different.
I'm not a full-blown,
everything by the book.
But I do believe
that when we have
a loving and close
connection with our children,
when they feel
that we like them,
when they know that we
see who they are not
because of what they have
accomplished or achieved
or even how they've behaved,
but we get who they are
and I love it.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: When
they feel that there
are things that they have in
common with us, when they feel
we're on their side, they are
more predisposed to going along
with the plan, whatever
it is you suggest.
>>LISA: And I'm
glad you said that.
Because there are extremes
of every movement out there.
This is not the extreme of the
attachment parenting movement.
This is about balance.
And I also like what
you said because when
you give a child too many
choices at a young age
and too much freedom
at a young age, then
they don't really understand.
I don't know if
they're emotionally
able to make that many choices.
>>STIFFELMAN: Great point.
>>LISA: I mean, I don't know.
>>STIFFELMAN: No, yeah.
>>LISA: I'm asking, kind of.
>>STIFFELMAN: I would
agree with that.
And that's where many parents
now, especially parents
that are doing yoga,
they're meditating,
they want this to be
part of their sort
of spiritual practice
or conscious living--
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: --it's
a little hazy.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: It's
a little unclear
about where that line is.
Because you do
recognize your child
is and equally respectable
being on the same par with you.
And yet, the deal going on,
the contract, the relationship
that you have with that child
for a period of at least
a few years, is to sort of
manage and oversee and help
them avoid the storms of life.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: I've been on
both sides of that.
I mean, I've asked my
four-year-old at one point,
so we're at a restaurant,
what do you want?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: She has no clue.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's OK though.
>>LISA: But what I wound
up doing was realizing,
oh, here's three choices.
>>STIFFELMAN: There-- yeah.
>>LISA: Choose that rather
than look at the 75 pages
on the menu and tell you--
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>LISA: So it's definitely
trial and error with parenting.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: So we've gone through
this idea of this power
struggle and how we lose our
power and how we could gain.
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
>>LISA: How do you do that?
How do you assert power without
being domineering and hate it?
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
Well, the first is that
you fortify connection
through attachment.
When I get a phone call-- and I
do mostly phone coaching now--
or I do a talk and somebody
poses the question my kid won't
do anything I ask,
won't listen to me,
deliberately doesn't put on
shoes when I ask even if he was
about to put them
on before I asked,
I will ask for the temperature
of the relationship.
So I'll go through these
stages of attachment
and I'll say, where it is
strong and where is it weak?
So usually a child's
misbehavior I
see as sort of a flashing
neon sign saying something
is not healthy or strong in
the connection or relationship.
It's not the only piece.
There's a lot more to being
captain than just attachment
and connection.
But it's certainly going
to be one of the pieces
that I start with.
>>LISA: Where a need
is not fulfilled?
>>STIFFELMAN: Where the child
is constantly and chronically
defiant, I'm always
going to look
at does the child feel
that the parent likes them.
Because here's the
thing, you know as a mom,
and you work, and
you're really busy,
that it's easy to set it
up so that every time you
walk in the room,
your daughter thinks
you're going to ask
her to do something.
I call it being
lost to the list.
So from the time our kids
get up in the morning,
you want to get them up.
That's a feat in itself
for some families.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Then you want
clothes on their body and socks
and shoes, and food in their
stomach, and the backpack,
and on and on it goes.
And then they come home, and
you sort of go in reverse.
And then it's a shower
and bath and bedtime.
>>LISA: And homework.
>>STIFFELMAN: And the
whole focus of your life
becomes getting these
things checked off.
And our kids resent that.
They know that life is about
more than checking things off
the list.
Thankfully, they're our
great teachers in that way.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Their goal in
life is to have fun pretty much
every minute that
they possibly can.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: And so
they see you coming.
And outside of a loving and
sweet friendly connection
they figure, oh, god.
What does she want now?
>>LISA: Right.
Oh, yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
they're already like--
>>LISA: And when my daughter
says, mom, can I play?
I go, oh.
Were we not playing?
Yeah.
That's a rough one.
It's like, busted.
But it's such a balance.
It's such a dance.
We're just going to
keep saying that.
So all right.
So electronics seems to
be another entire person
in the family these days.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's
a good way to put it.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: And they're
ever-present.
And it's very easy
to get captivated.
We, when we were kids, didn't
have the emotional aspects
to deal with that kids have to
deal with today with Facebook
and all the things that they're
connected with, and Instagram
and so forth.
How do you suggest
monitoring that?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
Boy, it's a whole huge topic.
I call it a house on fire.
I actually helped launch a site
on the "Huffington Post" called
Screen Sense based
on this conversation
and the conversation
around the need
that parents are having in
terms of how do we do this?
Because we're on
this runaway train.
And nobody was prepared.
And none of us really know
at what age should she
have a Facebook pagem abd
how often should she post?
Should I monitor it?
There aren't any quick
and easy answers.
This is one of the places
where-- when I give a talk,
I'll say to parents don't
believe anything I say.
Because I don't want to be--
yes, I'm called an expert.
But you're the
expert ultimately.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>STIFFELMAN: And so this
is one of those places where
I really invite and
encourage parents
to check in with themselves.
What feels right to you?
And then be fearless.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>STIFFELMAN: Be fearless.
Because if what
feels right to you,
for instance, is that
your daughter does not
have unmonitored, unbridled
access to a Facebook page,
first of all, trust it.
Secondly, don't
expect other parents
to do what you're doing.
In that regard, you
can't lean on them.
It's great if you can have
a network of other support.
But you may not.
>>LISA: Well,
there's a great video
that Susan's put together
about this particular issue.
Because it's an ongoing topic.
So let's take a look.
>>STIFFELMAN: Hi.
I'm Susan Stiffelman.
I'm the author of "Parenting
Without Power Struggles."
Often, parents tell me that they
feel the screens in their homes
have taken over.
And it's an uphill battle
just to get their kids
to do their homework or
chores or even come to dinner.
Here are some things
that you can do.
First, be fearless.
It's your job to be
the captain of the ship
and to establish guidelines that
are realistic and that work.
Most kids will spend
endless amounts of time
unless you contain it.
So don't be afraid
if your kids don't
like you or they get mad at you.
Second, turn everything off
at a predetermined time.
Just shut the router
off if you need to.
But tell your kids
what's going to happen
so they can get
their homework done.
Third, don't engage
in negotiations
that only fuel
their frustration.
Please, one more
game, 30 more minutes.
In the end, you just need
to be decisive and be clear.
Be compassionate and acknowledge
they want to keep going.
But when you say it's
over, it needs to be over.
Fourth, create alternatives,
outdoor activities,
family games.
Spend time with your kids
doing fun things that
will make it more
attractive to be with you
or be outdoors than it is
to stare at the screen.
Finally, take a look at
yourself and make sure
that you're not modeling
behavior for your kids
that suggests that they should
have unlimited use because you
do.
Make sure you're reading, that
you're exercising, that you're
having regular
conversations so that they
take their cues from you.
>>LISA: My daughter
actually got me
on that one, that last
one about how many times
when I pick her up from the
car and the phone would ring,
and I would answer it.
And granted, she's
been gone all day.
I pick her up at 3:00.
She gets in the car,
ready and excited
to tell me about her day.
And I'll answer the phone.
So she busted me on that
a good three years ago.
Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Well done, her.
>>LISA: Yup.
>>STIFFELMAN: And now
what are you doing?
>>LISA: Right.
She was seven or
eight at the time.
Yeah.
And she said to me,
mom, get off your phone.
And that's all I needed to hear.
And I'm sorry it took me
that long to hear that.
But at 3 o'clock-- and
most of the people around
me know-- don't
call me after 3:00.
If I'm in the carpool line,
I'm done when I pick her up.
And it's off until 9:00.
>>STIFFELMAN: Wow.
>>LISA: If there's
emergencies, of course.
But I have really five hours
a day to have with her now.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>LISA: And so it's going
to go away very soon.
>>STIFFELMAN: It is.
>>LISA: So I do that.
It is a tough one.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
Well done.
>>LISA: Especially,
I mean, conversations
are still in the
middle of things.
I'm waiting to hear back from
people who can't reach me.
I mean, it gets really--
the conversations
are still going on in my head.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: But I switch the
focus to her intentionally.
>>STIFFELMAN: But think about
what your modeling for her
in terms of how she's
going to use her devices.
Or at least you're
giving her a fair chance
to know internally that when
she's engaged constantly--
let's say she's sitting with
friends or grandma's there
and her phone keeps
beeping and bopping,
that she's got a picture in her
head of a different way this
would look, which
is that she's all
the way present with
whoever she's with.
>>LISA: That's true.
That's true.
And other things will
come through her texts
that she'll ignore that I've
seen that she's ignored.
>>STIFFELMAN: Fantastic.
>>LISA: But, OK,
what about that idea
of reading your child's texts
if they're teenagers even?
>>STIFFELMAN: Well,
there's a 13-year-old
and there's a 17-year-old.
>>LISA: OK.
Big range.
>>STIFFELMAN: So with
a 17-year-old, so much
of this with an older kid
and with younger, too,
again, you're going to be
checking in with yourself.
If you have a funny
feeling, listen to it.
Follow it.
Don't be afraid.
And certainly don't be afraid
of your kid not liking you
or being mad or
telling you you are
the meanest mom or the nosiest
mom or the most controlling
mom, or the most overprotective
mom in the world.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN:
We've all heard it.
It's just part of the deal.
>>LISA: But they have privacy.
At what point do you
allow just the privacy
and their own
relationships to build?
>>STIFFELMAN: It's a
very personal question.
And I think it's
based more on who
your child is,
who you recognize.
Do you feel that
they are trustworthy?
Are they in a position in
the rest of their lives,
showing up in a mature way,
to manage conversations
appropriately.
I would certainly
say now and then
I'd like to see my
14-year-old's texts.
I definitely don't think I would
give carte blanche depending
on the 15-year-old.
17 are less likely.
But if there was
something amiss,
if I felt like he or she
was locked in his room
all the time-- let's say
he was locked in his room,
not making eye
contact, hanging out
with kids who never
came to the house.
I probably would say,
you know, I'm not
comfortable with what it feels
like you're going through.
I'd love to really
look at your phone.
I'm paying for it, and
I'd like to have a look.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>STIFFELMAN: And then you'll
know a lot by their reaction.
>>LISA: I mean, this
is a whole topic
that goes into at what
point do you find out
if your child is having sex.
I'm sure I can't tell
throw you any curve balls.
You've heard it all.
But at what point do
you ask that question?
Or is it something that's
a parent's business?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
How do you approach that?
>>STIFFELMAN: You
know, again, this
is so built on a few things.
One is on the connection
that you have.
So the stages of
attachment, if you imagine
that this is the tree and
these are the roots, right?
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: And this comes
from Gordon Neufeld's work.
The entry point
or the first place
where the attachment journey
begins for the newborn
is proximity.
It's the touch, smell, sound,
contact, very physical.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: The second--
I'm skimming through these.
>>LISA: No, it's important.
>>STIFFELMAN: I go into
them in depth later.
But the second
stage is sameness,
where the child, the
two-year-old, learns language.
Because he wants to be
like you, mimicking you.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: They
want to be like you.
The third stage is
belonging or loyalty.
The three-year-old can
be very possessive.
They push their
sibling off your lap.
My mommy.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's
around the age of three
as attachment deepens.
The fourth stage
is significance.
The child feels seen and
cherished by you as is.
You know, I love your
laugh sweetheart.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Nobody tells
a joke the way you do.
The fifth stage is love.
It's going even
deeper, those roots.
And it's just this
unadulterated, uncomplicated
transmission of love.
Not sweetie I love you,
did you do your homework?
But just--
>>LISA: Giggly fun.
>>STIFFELMAN: --god, I love you.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
the final stage,
if all has gone well with
these stages, is being known.
It's from six on.
And this is the child who
tells you her secrets.
So to have that
kind of child who
will tell you I'm
thinking of having sex
with my 14-year-old
boyfriend, you
want to have a strong connection
in all of these areas.
You don't just get to
jump in when a child is 17
and say, tell me everything.
Because we often
teach our children
not to do that very
thing by the way
we react instead of respond
when they hit the wall.
>>LISA: How do you
get that back if you
are hearing this
for the first time?
>>STIFFELMAN: You
can get that back.
>>LISA: You can't?
>>STIFFELMAN: So absolutely.
You know, I used to write--
>>LISA: You can?
>>STIFFELMAN: Absolutely,
you can, C-A-N.
>>LISA: Great.
Great.
>>STIFFELMAN: For two
years, I wrote the Ask
the Therapist column
for grandparents.com.
And I was addressing questions
from parents every week
who were in their '60s and '70s.
So there's no expiration date
on connecting and attaching.
>>LISA: Great.
Good to know.
And then what do you say to
the 14-year-old or the 11
or whatever year old
that wants to have sex?
>>STIFFELMAN: So you do this
in the smaller ways first.
Children will test you.
They might say, you
know, I actually
got a D on my test, that test
that you cared a lot about,
mommy.
And by the way we
respond-- or react,
I should say-- you did what?
You didn't study after all?
How did that happen?
You have now taught your child
don't tell mommy the truth.
Whereas, I teach something in
my work called Act I parenting.
And I'll do a
demonstration if you want.
>>LISA: Yeah.
In Act I parenting, you're
coming alongside the child
rather than at.
I have this nifty hand motion.
>>LISA: OK.
I like the visuals.
>>STIFFELMAN: Instead
of coming at with,
how could you have gotten a D?
You know, I reviewed
it with you.
You told me you were
studying for it.
You would be coming alongside.
So should I--
>>LISA: Saying, yes?
>>STIFFELMAN: --run
it through with you?
>>LISA: Yes, go ahead.
>>STIFFELMAN: All right.
So let me back up for a second.
Act II is what most of us do
when a child has a complaint.
And maybe we can role play this.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: You
can be a child.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: And you're
going to make a complaint.
And I'm going to start by
doing what most parents do,
which is Act II
parenting, where I'm
going to be appealing to your
left, logical, word-based,
language-based rational brain
with suggestions and advice
to feel better, so I can hurry
up and make you feel better.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: OK.
So what's your complaint?
>>LISA: So I got a D
on my reading test.
>>STIFFELMAN: You got a D.
Honey, didn't you try at all?
>>LISA: I studied!
I studied!
>>STIFFELMAN: I know.
But you know, I saw
that you were studying
and you were texting
your friends.
That doesn't work.
Clearly, you can't do that.
>>LISA: Well, I do
it all the time.
>>STIFFELMAN: I know.
But you got a D. And
that's not the first D.
We're going to have
to talk about this.
OK.
So we'll pause.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: How is this
going in the parenting?
How do you as the child feel?
>>LISA: Sounding familiar.
That's OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: So that was
this, push, push back.
>>LISA: Struggle.
>>STIFFELMAN: OK.
So in Act I, which
prepares the child for you
to actually come in and
offer real captain parenting
stuff, pearls of wisdom, you're
taking things down a notch.
You're responding
instead of reacting.
You're slowing it down.
You're not wordy.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: Because
you're not appealing
to her left logical brain.
You're appealing to her
right emotional brain,
which is where she is right now.
Right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: So you're
not going to say a lot.
I talk about Act I
comments or responses
as being kind of
comic book language.
Like, oh, oof,
darn, gosh, really?
Poof.
Pow.
Wow.
>>LISA: Kind of neutral.
>>STIFFELMAN: You're
trying to bring it down.
You're bringing her down.
She's checking you
out, by the way.
You want to leave her
maybe scratching her head.
Like, wow, mommy
didn't say what I
thought she would say
here This is interesting.
And you're looking to
get at least three yeses.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: And that
sounds a little formulaic.
But I get emails
every day from parents
who are telling me this works.
So I like to make it really
simple and user friendly.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>STIFFELMAN: So look for
three nods or three yeses.
You'll watch me.
I'm going to ask you
questions or make comments
that I pretty much know you're
going to have to say yes
to just to make you more
receptive to what will follow,
which would be my advice.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: So make
the same complaint.
>>LISA: Mom, I got
a D on my test.
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh, sweetie.
Boy, that's not really
what you expected, is it?
>>LISA: I studied.
>>STIFFELMAN: So you were really
expecting that you'd better?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's one yes.
>>LISA: Well, I kind of didn't
understand this one part.
>>STIFFELMAN: Ah, yeah.
So that part confused you.
>>LISA: I should have
asked the teacher.
>>STIFFELMAN: So
looking back, you're
thinking maybe
that was a time you
might have gotten a little help?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's two yeses.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>STIFFELMAN: Huh.
So are you maybe also
a little disappointed?
>>LISA: Yeah, but I
was really thinking
that you were going to
be disappointed, too.
>>STIFFELMAN: Ah, yeah.
So my reaction isn't
what you expected, huh?
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>STIFFELMAN: All right.
>>LISA: Well, I'm
agreeing. yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: So we've
got three confirmations.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Now, how are
you feeling as the child?
>>LISA: Heard.
>>STIFFELMAN: Heard.
>>LISA: Listened to.
>>STIFFELMAN: Good.
>>LISA: Expressed.
>>LISA: I've told
you how I feel.
>>STIFFELMAN: Good.
>>LISA: So, yeah, I got to
another level rather than--
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: And you're
not as resistant probably.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: If I
were then to say, well,
would you be open to
hearing some ideas
I might have about what
might make it work better?
Then I'm more likely--
no guarantee--
>>LISA: Could you say
maybe next time you could?
Or is that--
>>STIFFELMAN: But
I'm always asking
to be invited to the party.
I don't crash the party.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Would you want
to hear a couple of thoughts
I have about how it
might go differently
or better next time?
>>LISA: And if they say
no, that's fine for now.
>>STIFFELMAN: Then
because I'm not
needy, which is-- when you're
down here, you're needy.
"I need you to" are the worst
words to begin a request.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: So when you're
down here, you're needy.
If I have this aroma of
authority and confidence
as a captain--
>>LISA: I get the
least results that way.
>>STIFFELMAN: But
then if I don't
need you to want my
great suggestions,
then there's a much greater
likelihood that you'll
say, yeah, mom, what do you
think I could have done?
But if I'm shoving it down your
throat, crashing the party,
you're going to say no.
>>LISA: That's a parent
that would invite a child
to tell them secrets or
what's going on at school
or even if a child's being
bullied or humiliated.
>>STIFFELMAN: Exactly.
Yes.
>>LISA: And you
don't know about it
until it shows up
in a black eye.
So there's another
really, really good piece
that Susan has done
here on bullying.
Take a look at this.
This is a very hot topic.
>>STIFFELMAN: Hi.
I'm Susan Stiffelman.
I'm the author of "Parenting
Without Power Struggles."
Unfortunately, many
parents come to me
because their
children are bullied,
and they don't know
what to do about it.
Here's some advice.
First, encourage
your child to learn
how to avoid
engaging with a bully
or showing signs of weakness
which keep them in the victim
mode.
Those things would include
whining, crying, pouting,
begging.
You want your child
to simply walk away,
so that they don't feed
the bully's behavior.
Second, teach your child
verbal tools and body language
that convey assertiveness.
No!
Back off!
Stop bugging me!
Help the child be empowered
and stand up for himself.
Third, talk with your child's
teacher if things escalate,
so that you can set up a
meeting with the bully and/or
their parents and establish
clear, firm consequences
so the behavior
does not continue.
Finally, allow your child
to offload with you,
express anxiety, fear,
have a cry if necessary,
so that they don't bring all
that emotional turmoil to them
to school.
And they can then be more
empowered and assertive
on the playground or wherever
the bullying is happening.
>>LISA: So this
happened to my daughter.
And it's happened to so
many people, where I just
wanted to fight
her battle for her
so much rather than
giving her the tools
to express it herself.
But she did not want me to.
Because it would
have embarrassed her
at home for a raging mom
to come in and take over.
And I respected that with her.
But what do you tell parents
who are on the fence that want
to go in and take over
and those that don't?
>>STIFFELMAN: It depends on
what the nature of the bullying
would be.
>>LISA: Situation.
>>STIFFELMAN: If it's something
physical or below the belt--
if it's a little bit of
teasing, then you ideally
want to help empower your
child to learn to say,
I don't like that.
That's not nice.
Don't speak to me that way.
You want to help kids feel
that they have some resilience
and strength.
If it's anything beyond
that-- and of course, it also
depends on the
age of the child--
then with a young child, you
absolutely have to jump in.
There's no guarantee that
the school will act on--
as we've seen over and over
again-- on your child's behalf.
>>LISA: So ask for an authority?
Go in and talk to an authority?
Bring it up?
Or in what way
would you jump in?
What's the--
>>STIFFELMAN: Well, it depends.
>>LISA: It's all
different, I know.
>>STIFFELMAN: So if the
child's being bullied
on the playground,
being pushed around,
things like that, then
you're going to come in
and say I want to talk
with you about what's
going on with my daughter
not in an accusational way.
You want to come across
as part of the team.
You want to assume that
they have your child's best
interests at heart.
They just may not
be aware of it.
More and more schools now
are instituting programs
where they have assemblies.
They have people coming
into the classroom.
>>LISA: A lot more awareness.
>>STIFFELMAN: They're
opening a dialogue.
There's more awareness.
But it happens constantly.
>>LISA: What about
bullying at home
in a way, where one
parent is so much more
strict and harsh
than another parent?
>>STIFFELMAN: Well, there's
a few questions in that one.
>>LISA: Siblings also.
Well, siblings are different.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
So with co-parenting-- and this
can also be true with parents
who are separated or divorced--
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>STIFFELMAN: --you cannot
control anyone period.
Let's just start there.
>>LISA: OK.
>>STIFFELMAN: That
includes your child.
And that includes
the other parent.
And if you come at your
other parent, your husband,
your former husband,
wife, whatever it is,
telling them how they
should have done it,
or how they should parent, or
implying that they're clueless,
or they're a slacker, or
they don't love your child
as much as you do,
you will automatically
guarantee they will not be
receptive to your input.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>STIFFELMAN: So you're going to
always start with the same Act
I. You know, I get
the feeling you
thought it would be OK that she
had ice cream for breakfast.
>>LISA: Or you didn't
do the homework.
>>STIFFELMAN: Or
you felt that it
was yelling-- we'll do the
bullying-- that you felt
that yelling was the only
way to get through to her.
Maybe that's what happened
in your household.
And it seems like
you came out OK.
Right.
So do you see that we're
softening your partner
to be a little more open?
Because he's feeling or she's
feeling more understood.
You're showing some empathy.
And I get that there are a lot
of times when yelling seems
to be the only thing
that does work.
So we're starting with
a genuine friendliness.
Would you be willing to listen
to my feelings about that?
Because I've been learning
new ways of parenting.
And I'd love for us to be
more aligned with each other
if you're open.
But you're coming alongside;
you're not coming at.
And you're not parenting
the other parent,
which will not get you very far.
>>LISA: That's a
very good point.
And so when it comes to
doing homework and so forth,
to get another parent
on the same page as you,
it's not necessarily
going to happen.
But you can try in the ways that
you're speaking about, right?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: So I mean, just
the homework issue alone is
something that you
have to constantly--
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: What is that?
>>STIFFELMAN: It's this.
It's that our children
getting their homework
done-- until it's
done, we're anxious.
So we're down here.
When you're anxious or needy,
remember, you're down here.
So the child becomes
the means by which
your anxiety will go away.
It's not until their homework
is done that you can then
relax and feel competent again.
So there's a lot of manipulation
and pushing and prodding
and cajoling to get it done,
so that you can feel better.
>>LISA: Is it also a
child's game to say,
well, I know I'm
supposed to do homework,
because I wrote it down or I
know what I'm supposed to do.
But I'm going to see how
far I can push the envelope.
Is that maybe the case?
>>STIFFELMAN: I call it mom TV.
So there's this thing
that I've invented
that's called mom
TV, which is things
aren't very interesting
right now, not much going on.
And there's a great
show called mom TV.
I know exactly how
to get it going.
I don't think I'm going to do
my homework for a while, mommy.
Or I don't know if I have any.
And then you're just, what?
>>LISA: That's an On button.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
now the show is on.
The Lisa show or that Janet
show, or whoever the parent is.
And we have to be less
invested and needy when
it comes to this.
Oh, really?
You're thinking you
might not do it?
Huh.
Boy.
Hmm.
Darn.
Gosh.
Wow.
Pam.
And then there's a lot
of avenues you might go.
You might explore
with the teacher,
so that the relationship
or the contract
is much more between the
child and the teacher
than it is between
the two of you.
>>LISA: How long have you
been coaching parents?
I mean, are you
considered a parent coach?
Or are you a therapist?
>>STIFFELMAN: I'm both.
>>LISA: Both.
Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: I
do a lot of both.
I do a lot of speaking.
And of course, I
write my weekly column
for the "Huffington Post"
>>LISA: Which is great.
>>STIFFELMAN: I'm their parent
coach-- and a lot of events
all over the world now.
But still, the
coaching is where I've
learned so much from one on one.
>>LISA: Examples.
And in that situation,
what's the biggest
reason why people
come to see you?
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh my gosh.
I think if I were
to sum it up, it
would probably have to do with
kids not cooperating or doing
what they're asked.
But then when they come to see
me for more serious issues,
the child is withdrawing.
They're sullen.
They're depressed.
They seem to be in trouble.
They're pulling away.
Or they're very anxious.
Or there's something going on
in the family, in the household.
And by the way, these
are educated, loving,
you know, healthy,
sophisticated families.
It's not just--
we all need help.
I've turned to people for help.
I see myself in many ways, Lisa,
as the auntie in the village.
You know, that if we're meant
to raise our children together,
it's really, as you know,
it's impossible for one or two
people to do it on their own.
It is an impossible task.
>>LISA: And families are
so spread out these days
in different states,
different countries sometimes.
And it's definitely
a situation where
you need to find the village.
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
Or create it.
>>LISA: Or create it.
>>STIFFELMAN: I'm a
big proponent of that.
And so I sort of see myself,
simply because I worked
with thousands of families,
kids, and parents,
I've learned a lot.
A lot comes through.
There's an intuition
that gets heightened
or more accurate as you go.
>>LISA: So in the case
where children are withdrawn
or in the situation
of anxiety or feeling
anxious about things, do
you have tips and techniques
for that type of parenting?
>>STIFFELMAN: I do a
lot of work with that.
And it will always start, just
to mention a couple of things,
with positioning
yourself as the one
that the child feels
safe to turn to.
Many kids who I've worked
with who are quite depressed
and/or anxious are afraid
of upsetting their parent.
Or they're afraid that their
parent's reaction, as opposed
to response, will only
make things worse.
So I had a parent just
the other day coming in
with a very depressed teenager.
And she's trying
to get rah, rah.
You know, let's go exercise.
Let's do this.
Let's do that.
Now, when you're depressed,
legitimately depressed,
you don't have the
energy to do that.
So this is a kid who's on
video games all day long.
And for the moment, that's
all that gives him comfort.
It's like his drug.
And so, yes.
On the one hand, I would
say this is not a good idea.
On the other, we
have to get in there
and start to strengthen him
and give him an alternative.
Otherwise, I don't
know what might happen.
>>LISA: Are you
seeing an increase
of children on antidepressants?
>>STIFFELMAN: To some degree.
You know, it's difficult.
Because antidepressants
with children and teens
is a risky business.
It's not easy to finesse and
to get the medications right.
I think there are
times, however,
when they're very appropriate.
Even though I work a lot with, I
call it the ADD-ish population,
the real right-brain creative--
>>LISA: Oh, why?
>>STIFFELMAN: I
don't like the label.
I don't think it's
a disorder, per se.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: I don't think
it's a deficit, per se.
I think it's sort of a
constellation of behaviors.
And it's a way
the brain is wired
that can make life very
interesting and great.
>>LISA: Oh, it's a gift for me.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
For me, too.
So I have had to learn
how to manage myself.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: But a
lot of these kids--
there have been occasions
where I've said run,
don't walk to get
this kid on something
for a couple of
months, so he even
knows how to sit in a chair
if it's very, very extreme.
But generally speaking, there
are a lot of alternative things
that people can try.
But I also caution parents,
don't ignore your instincts.
If your child needs
help, get help.
We can't manage everything
just by sitting quietly
or being centered and talking.
>>LISA: Yeah,
that's a good point.
But on the homework
issue, you can help them.
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh, yeah.
And so it starts with the--
so there's practical things.
Like one of the
things that I'll do
with kids is-- because
this part of the brain,
the prefrontal cortex, is
responsible for staying
on task, focused,
managing impulses,
and those sorts of things.
So we know that the brain
develops from back to front.
And this is the last to
mature or come on board.
>>LISA: Decision making is
the last to come on board?
>>STIFFELMAN: Decision
making, organization, right?
Planning.
It's called the
executive function.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>STIFFELMAN: So when
you're asking a child
to start to do their
homework, you're
really calling upon
their prefrontal cortex.
And for many kids, by 3:00
in the afternoon or 4:00,
if it hasn't been all day
kind of subdued and muted,
it is by then.
So one of the things
I'll do with kids
is I'll say, OK, how about
you do half this worksheet.
Then I want you to run around
the backyard three times,
bring me four blades of
grass, sit down and sing
the "Happy Birthday
Song," and then do
the second half of the page.
Now, you're probably thinking,
what did she just say?
But kids actually love this.
Because it wakes up their brain.
They're doing the work.
But they're thinking,
how many blades of grass?
What song am I supposed to sing?
And so you're lightening the
load, the mood a little bit.
So you're making it a
little bit more fun.
>>LISA: I did that last night.
We played soccer in the house,
in the middle of homework.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
Beautiful, exactly.
Bravo.
>>LISA: It was good,
til my husband got hurt.
All right.
Let's take a look at
this video on homework.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's hilarious.
Hi.
I'm Susan Stiffelman.
I'm the author of "Parenting
Without Power Struggles."
Often, parents ask me how can
I get my kids to do homework
without meltdowns,
drama, and negotiations?
Here's what you can do.
First, rule out any
legitimate reason
that might cause your child
not to want to do the work.
It could be a
learning disability,
a problem with the content or
understanding how to proceed,
or a challenge with the teacher.
Second, make sure
that your child's
had a healthy snack
and some down time,
so that they're
fortified and ready to go
when it's time to
start their homework.
Third, avoid turning
on the TV or letting
them play video games
just for a little while
because that transition
is very difficult.
Leave those things until after
the homework has been finished.
Fourth, make sure that you
chunk down long assignments
into more manageable units.
It's much easier for a child
to get started on homework
if they know they only
have work 7 to 10 minutes
and they can see light
at the end of the tunnel.
Finally, create a
comfortable, appealing place
where they can do their work.
That might be a comfy chair or
a nice fragrance in the air.
But make it a place
where they can focus,
and they can relax
and stay on task.
>>LISA: Again, very good tips,
things you can try at home.
Another topic is--
I got my list here.
I have so many
things to ask you.
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh.
>>LISA: What about spanking?
Big in our day,
when we were kids.
What about these days?
>>STIFFELMAN: People still
spank their children.
And it's a shame, because
it compromises, remember,
the stages of attachment.
What overrides a child's
resistance and works
is to have a strong,
loving connection.
Generally speaking,
children will
cooperate when they feel
seen, liked, enjoyed,
all those things.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: Now, that's
not across the board.
There are kids who
have impulse problems.
But I've seen that there are so
many alternatives to spanking,
that it's not really necessary.
And it usually comes from here.
It usually comes from a
parent who's hurt, angry--
>>LISA: Lost control.
>>STIFFELMAN: --feeling
disrespected, lost control,
feeling desperate.
So it does not
convey to the child
that somebody is
calmly in charge.
It's a little bit
scary for the child.
I'm not saying terrifying.
But kids, really, if you can
stay here as much as possible,
then why not?
If other approaches work,
then why not use them?
And my personal philosophy
is that it breaks the trust
completely with the
child and a parent.
That one who loves and
who touches and hugs also
hits and spanks.
It breaks a trust barrier.
It really, for some reason,
severs something intuitively
with me.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
And by the same token, so does
you're lazy, you're a brat.
If your words are violent
towards your children--
>>LISA: Great point.
>>STIFFELMAN: --then it
can mute to some degree,
or perhaps lessen the impact, of
you know, of course I love you,
of course you're amazing.
>>LISA: So what if you
lose it as a parent?
>>STIFFELMAN: You will.
>>LISA: You know?
And yes.
When you lose it as a parent,
how do regain that trust?
How do you rebuild?
How do you take it back?
How do you do that?
>>STIFFELMAN: You apologize.
>>LISA: You apologize.
And I've modeled
this for my son.
Because believe me, again, with
all the training and experience
I had, there were times
I lost it as well.
And to me, an apology
is not simply I'm sorry.
An apology has several parts.
The first is I'm sorry that I
lost it with you this morning.
The second is that you
empathize or you sort of visit
their side of the fence.
And let them know that you can
imagine how that affected them.
I can imagine that it
was kind of scary for you
when mommy really
was yelling while we
were getting in the car.
That might have felt
yucky in your body.
>>LISA: What about when
you were five years old
and they might
not even remember?
Well, the essence
of them remembers.
And you say, I'm really
sorry that I x, y, z.
Can you go back that far?
>>STIFFELMAN: You can
bring it up absolutely
if you think that it's relevant.
The third piece
would be I'm working
on not doing that again.
I'm working to be a
better person and more
in charge of myself, and
even when I'm frustrated,
learning different
ways of handling that.
And I hope you can forgive me.
And is there anything you
need from me sweetheart?
So to me, there
are these elements
of an apology that not only
help the child restore trust
and faith in you, but
that model for her--
like, I now see with
my 22-year-old son,
when he is rude or
edgy, he owns it.
Mom, you know what?
Yesterday, when I
was talking to you--
>>LISA: I'm sorry.
Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: --I'm
really sorry for that.
And it's not a series of excuses
or rationalizations you know.
>>LISA: Well, what
about when parents
are going through very,
very tough economic times
and they're fighting
about money and there's
fighting between parents?
>>STIFFELMAN: Tension.
>>LISA: Tension.
Do you turn around and
apologize to the child?
I mean, what do you
do, just let it ride?
>>STIFFELMAN: You
start with, you know,
you were around
this morning when
daddy and I were
yelling at each other.
And I call this a
Sunday afternoon Act I.
But it's still
the Act I. I would
love to hear from
you, sweetheart,
how that was for you.
What was that like for you when
you heard daddy and me arguing?
And then zip your lips together.
And keep letting the
child tell me more.
So she might say
I didn't like it.
Yeah.
And don't justify or explain,
or "we only did it because."
>>LISA: Or solve it.
>>STIFFELMAN: You're not
going to the solving.
You're just bringing it back.
So I imagine that was a
little bit rough on you.
It was pretty loud.
Yeah.
I don't think you like that when
mommy and daddy are so loud.
And you're just helping
her feel that you're
captaining the ship again.
You've restored your role.
I can hear your truth.
I can handle it.
And we'll get through this.
>>LISA: So in a
calm moment, listen
without solving,
fixing, explaining.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: And let it ride.
>>STIFFELMAN: I
call it offloading.
And there's another
piece that-- if we
can talk about frustration, if
it fits here-- when children
are frustrated, it's
like they're on a road.
And so in a sense, it
could be frustrating
that the child can't have
the household that she wants,
or she can't get out
of doing homework.
Right?
So when a child's
frustrated, they're
either going to
become aggressive.
Let's go back to homework if
that's OK, just for a second.
And she might become aggressive.
I hate you.
You're always making me do
things I don't want to do.
>>LISA: Right.
>>STIFFELMAN: Or she adapts.
And to adapt, the
child needs to go
through-- I use
Kubler-Ross' model-- denial.
I'm really going to have
to do this homework.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>STIFFELMAN: Anger, why
are you making me do it?
Bargaining, mommy, please.
If you just give me 20
more minutes, I'll do it.
Disappointment,
instead of depression,
where she feels sad
about having to do
the homework, and acceptance.
Any time you've stumbled
and you've gotten upset
because there's been a
problem, the child, in a sense,
needs you to
restore and help her
feel sad about what happened.
So going back to the
fighting in the morning,
you just sometimes
might help her
have a cry about the fight this
morning that she overheard.
>>LISA: What about when they
do something that is either
harmful to someone or they
break something that's valuable
or they do something quote
"wrong" in your world?
How do you not chastise them in
the moment, make them feel bad?
Or I mean, how do you teach?
How do you do that?
>>STIFFELMAN: It's
a good question.
So when the child's
triggered and upset
or you're triggered
and upset, those
are not teachable moments.
Just forget it.
It's not going to happen.
>>LISA: So that's
where the crying over
spilled milk phrase
comes from, right?
>>STIFFELMAN: So let's
say an example might
be that she broke something.
If you're feeling pretty
calm and, you know,
it's not your priceless
heirloom and you
feel like you can handle
it, then you say wow.
And she may, depending
on what the precedent
has been, if she feels you're
going to get really reactive,
might make excuses, might
pretend she didn't do it,
might blame it on
her brother, right?
>>LISA: I didn't do that.
>>STIFFELMAN: But if
you see her, you know,
throwing the ball and
it hits the thing,
and you had said don't
play with the ball inside,
and the next thing you know
the vase is on the floor--
>>LISA: Or the
water on the laptop.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes,
hypothetically speaking.
Wow.
I got to tell you,
sweetie, it's going
to take me a couple of
minutes to kind of get back
to where I want to be to talk
about what just happened.
So you're modeling for her--
>>LISA: Do you take a break?
>>STIFFELMAN: I
might take a break.
Especially, if there's water
in the laptop, and you've
been discussing
that a few times.
>>LISA: And the adult brain
goes to all the things
that you just lost.
>>STIFFELMAN: Exactly.
>>LISA: Do you need to go
take a timeout yourself?
>>STIFFELMAN: You may.
You may.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
then there may well
be some reasonable, appropriate
response on her part,
of course, depending
on her age and the rest
of the circumstances.
Because we do want our kids to
be responsible and accountable.
We're not raising children, by
the way, we're raising adults.
And so when you're
always letting your kids
off the hook-- so
it may well be you
made a decision and a choice to
play with the ball inside when
I asked you several
times not to.
In a little while, we're going
to talk about what's next.
But not in a mean, scary way.
I'm owning the role here.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Can we talk a little
bit about-- these
are good topics--
sex, drugs, and food.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
not rock and roll?
>>LISA: Not all at once.
No, sex, drugs, and food.
So sex we've covered a little
bit on how to talk about,
educate.
Do you ever use yourself as
an example and say, oh, well,
I had sex when I was nine.
So I don't suggest
you doing that.
I mean, do you ever
suggest doing that?
They're going to only
model your behavior, right?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: Back when I did all
those drugs, don't do them.
>>STIFFELMAN: No, I don't.
And you know, our
kids are so hip.
They're so tuned into us.
They're pretty sure that we did
something, that we did inhale.
So you know, it depends
on the age of the child.
But I do think that you
can go back and say,
here's some of the choices that
I made that I regret making.
>>LISA: You do?
>>STIFFELMAN: I
absolutely might say that.
Now, I wouldn't say
that to a 12-year-old.
I might say that to a
15-year-old who is about to go
to a party where
there's likely to be--
>>LISA: You know
drugs are present.
>>STIFFELMAN: Now,
with a 15-year-old,
it well may be that my
15-year-old doesn't go, too.
That's a funny age.
And there's a funny line there.
But the point is
that your bigger goal
is to hold yourself
in a place where
your kids feel like
they can tell you.
And by the way, they're not
going to tell you everything.
They're just not.
There's going to always
be this edginess.
Because their job is to
individuate as they get older.
>>LISA: Yeah.
You mentioned my
15-year-old might not go.
At what point do you let
them go and work out that no
or let them go and
make their own choices,
I mean, in your world.
>>STIFFELMAN: There's
no hard and fast--
it depends so much on the
child and their judgment
and who they're hanging out
with, the rest of the friends.
With my son, I trusted
him quite a bit.
I trusted the crowd
he hung around with.
They were pretty good kids.
I knew they were
probably doing something.
>>LISA: They're also
childhood friends.
>>STIFFELMAN: They're
It was a safe place
where we lived.
There are a lot of
elements to consider.
Is there a car involved?
Are parents home?
>>LISA: Adults present.
Right.
Exactly.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
then, of course, it's
sort of shocking,
because the parents
might be buying
them the alcohol.
>>LISA: So food, other
question, about at what
point do you monitor, tell them
what to eat, what not to eat?
How do you avoid eating
disorders, body images?
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh, gosh.
>>LISA: Do we have another hour?
>>STIFFELMAN: In 30 seconds?
>>LISA: I know, exactly.
Yeah.
So at what point do you set up
what a child's intake of food
should be?
And how do you
monitor that or not?
>>STIFFELMAN: You
know, most of us
want our kids to eat healthy
food as long as we can possibly
convince them to do that.
And there will come a
point, for most children,
where they will do what
you don't want them to.
They will eat the
Twinkies and the Fritos.
And they'll take great
pleasure in doing it
when they know that
you don't want them to.
>>LISA: First thing I
did when I got a car,
went and got Doritos.
>>STIFFELMAN: Exactly, right?
>>LISA: Yup, exactly.
>>STIFFELMAN: I use
these two words a lot
as kids get older,
amused and indifferent.
So that there's a
part of you that's
watching this thing, the
same thing you probably did.
You just can't care that much.
You can't make it mean
these big global things when
your kids deviate
from the organic vegan
sort of thing for
a little while.
Now, that's my opinion.
It doesn't mean I'm right.
And there are some kids
who will really staunchly
adhere to the plan.
You can certainly use fear.
And you could say here are the
implications of eating food
with additives.
But honestly, I think
most of our kids
are going to have to
sort of find their way.
>>LISA: But when you see
a child gaining weight--
>>STIFFELMAN: Oh,
well that's different.
>>LISA: --getting, you know,
out of the healthy weight range?
>>STIFFELMAN: Yeah.
And some of that is going to
be what you have in the house.
And some of it--
usually kids who
are overeating who
are mindlessly eating,
who are snacking,
who are ingesting
just massive quantities without
knowing if they're hungry,
there's a different
issue there anyway.
I'm always, always looking
underneath to the root
cause of a child's
problematic behavior.
I don't treat it with scripts.
And I don't do it superficially.
There's always a way that the
child's behavior makes sense.
I line up with that.
So the question
would be, why does it
make sense that my child
is eating constantly,
as opposed to how can
I get him to stop?
Why does it make sense
that my daughter wants
to have sex with her
12-year-old boyfriend,
rather than how
can I control it?
>>LISA: So is it what's
missing that they
would need to cover with that?
>>STIFFELMAN: Very possibly.
It might be what's missing.
It might be a peer influence.
It might be all kinds of things.
It could be something
biochemical.
It could be hormonal.
It could be that
grandma just died.
I don't know what it is.
But I want to find out
what the actual reason is,
so I can captain the ship
and sail through the storm,
not to be too nautical on you.
As opposed to, how do I just
control my child's behavior?
>>LISA: So you're looking
for the need or a way
to find out what's going
on behind the problematic
behavior.
>>STIFFELMAN: Great.
Beautifully said.
>>LISA: So I'm looking
at the recap here.
And just because this
is new for many people,
it's the first time
they've heard it,
I think the most
important thing here
that I've learned is that we,
as parents, are not always
going to get it right.
>>STIFFELMAN: That's right.
>>LISA: There isn't
a right and a wrong.
>>STIFFELMAN: Thank you.
Amen.
>>LISA: There's
a way of doing it
that it can be as
conscious as possible
and be mindful as possible.
And someone once told me
when I had a young child
that your relationship
to your coffee cup
will be observed by your child.
And what I learned from that
was every single thing you do
is mirrored when they
are little, little.
And they look at your
relationship to everything.
And it's just something
as simple as a coffee cup.
They will look at how you
sip it and the relationships
in the bigger
picture that you have
with your spouses
and your parents.
The way you treat
your mother will
be the way they
treat their mother.
>>STIFFELMAN: Exactly.
>>LISA: So it's
something to be aware of.
You're not always
going to perfect it.
I don't.
>>STIFFELMAN: Right.
>>LISA: I don't.
I'm aware of it though.
>>STIFFELMAN: Well, that's
the start, you know?
>>LISA: I'm aware of my not
perfecting it sometimes.
>>STIFFELMAN: Like
when I do talks,
I'll often say if you get
nothing else today, think about
whether you're
here, here, or here.
And just pay attention.
Be aware.
Change always starts
with awareness.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
I have a chapter
called, Live Like Your Kids
Are Watching, Because They Are.
So it's exactly
what you're saying.
Our greatest influence over our
children is not what we say,
but it's how we live our
lives in front of them.
>>LISA: Yeah.
That's true.
And that's true for when
you have other people's
children in your house as well.
Yeah.
It's not like nobody's watching.
So a few of the
things we've learned
is the captain of the ship
doesn't need their child
to behave to know
that she's in charge.
So that's a very important part.
To come alongside your child,
rather than at your child.
Connection, being very,
very, very important,
and it's never too late.
>>STIFFELMAN: It's
never, ever too late.
I mean, what's so touching
for me in the work
I do, I might have an
18-year-old or a 20-year-old.
The parent finally
convinces the kid
to come in and do some
counseling, but warns me,
he's not going to say a word.
He's not going to
open his mouth.
He doesn't talk.
And I can't get the kid to
shut up, to be quiet, to not...
to stop talking.
And then I find out
how much he longs
to be able to talk like
that with his parents.
It's so sweet.
>>LISA: This is also
really great information
for grandparents--
>>STIFFELMAN: Yes.
>>LISA: --who have
a very big divide
in terms of generational
divide and knowing
how to respond to teenage
grandchildren, who now have
technology that
grandparents never had.
And babies, too.
>>STIFFELMAN: And
also, the grandparent
is in this terrific
position to be
an influencer of the child
at a phase of his or her life
when he can't really go to
mom and dad as comfortably,
but might be able to
go to a grandparent
if the grandparent really
has the feeling of safety.
>>LISA: Safe.
That's a very important role.
Well, thank you.
There's so much to cover.
I think--
>>STIFFELMAN: My pleasure.
>>LISA: -we did a good job
in the small amount of time
that we have.
And people also can
connect with you.
You answer their
questions on Facebook.
>>STIFFELMAN: I'm
there on Facebook.
I have a page there where
I engage with people.
And I have my newsletter
on my website,
"Parenting Without
Power Struggles."
And I'm all over the place.
So I'm easy to find.
>>LISA: So if people have
individual questions,
they can reach you
that way as well?
>>STIFFELMAN: They
can reach me that way.
>>LISA: You're going to
get a lot of phone callS,
a lot of emails, a
lot of information.
Thank you so much--
>>STIFFELMAN: Thank you.
>>LISA: --for your contribution.
>>STIFFELMAN: It's
been a real pleasure.
>>LISA: I really appreciate it.
And thank you so
much for joining me.
If you'd like to share my
interview with Susan Stiffelman
or share it with your
friends or watch it again,
you can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]